---
title: Krannert Art Museum Special Exhibition Immortalizes Artist Louise Fishman
date: 2021-11-03
author: Talia Duffy
---

The Krannert Art Museum is nearly silent. The only sounds are a murmur of a recorded television interview from an adjacent room and the occasional squeak of shoes as a patron moves from piece to piece.

But Louise Fishman, whose art occupies the East Gallery this semester, wanted her paintings to scream.

<!-- excerpt -->

The uniform white walls of the museum are slashed apart by her colorful abstract paintings. “ANGRY LOUISE- SERIOUS RAGE” pops out in bold capital letters before a lined background.

Following Fishman’s death in July, the Krannert Art Museum (KAM) at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign has curated a semester-long special exhibition of her work. 

“She talks about herself as an expressionist, so there’s definitely emotion and feeling coming out,” UIUC Fine Arts graduate Robert Porter, who was visiting the exhibition, said. “When you want to do something more than just show a picture of your face, you have to start talking about what’s inside you.”

Fishman received her Masters of Fine Arts from UIUC in 1965 and remained involved with the College of Fine and Applied Arts for many years.

The original intention of the exhibit was to connect fine arts students with a successful alumna, complete with a presentation delivered by Fishman herself. Amy Powell, Curator of Modern and Contemporary Art at KAM, started working on the collection in 2017.

“I worked with the artist, her spouse, and her galleries to select work for the exhibition checklist, which includes more than 100 framed works on paper, painted leporello books, more informal sketches, and one video interview,” Powell said.

Now, the exhibit doubles as a memorial for Fishman’s life and career.

Over the nearly six decades she was active, Fishman experimented with a variety of styles, themes, and mediums. Powell believes that her personal interaction with Fishman gives the exhibit a unique insight into her career. 

“Most of the work in the show comes from Louise’s archive,” Powell said. “The curatorial process was like other temporary exhibitions in that I worked with an artist intensively over several years, but I would highlight how much I learned about painting from Louise.”

Some of the most recognizable pieces Powell included is the “Angry Woman” series, which includes the aforementioned “Angry Louise.”

As a Jewish lesbian born in the 20th century, Fishman was faced with many frustrations surrounding identity, sexuality, belonging, and loss. Abstraction was her medium to explore these ideas- most explicitly in the “Angry Woman” paintings.

“She was kind of groundbreaking,” Jackson Bird said. As the lead security guard at KAM, he has familiarized himself with Fishman’s style. “You might think that abstract art is just using lines and everything like that, but she experimented with borders...that gets you to think differently.”

The exhibit will be open until February 26, 2022. Until then, the staff at KAM wants students and community members alike to be exposed to Fishman’s unique contributions to art and society. 

“I hope people take with them a vision of an artist deeply invested in making a discipline her own, finding her voice and her confidence along the way,” Powell said. “I also hope that folks see what is possible when queer feminist work is centered in art history and in museums.”

Near the center of the exhibition is a collection of eight paintings. Seven of them portray a single circle in the center of the canvas with varying colors and patterns.

But the eighth stands out from the rest. It’s scribbled with lines of Fishman’s own writing, a catalogue of her mind’s dilemma while creating these pieces. Scribed, fragmented messages are present in much of Fishman’s work, an aspect that sets her apart from other abstract artists. 

To her, these messages were a connection between herself and the art. Now, they are a connection between her and the world; the voice of an artist that can never create again. 

“Thinking during execution that any mark I make is wonderful. A fleeting thought but necessary to begin work,” Fishman wrote. “Thinking later how sloppy and thoughtless are the paintings...

“No secrets. Painting turns to journal.”
