---
title: Students Resort to Theft, Ramen in Absence of Sustainable University Meal Plans
date: 2021-11-17
author: Talia Duffy
---

Someone has broken into the Ikenberry dining hall.

They entered through the doors to the upstairs seating area, triggering the high-pitched alarm that will continue to sound until the custodial staff appears–– 15 minutes later–– to shut it off.
But they weren’t looking to cause trouble. 

Many students have expressed concerns that they can’t get an adequate amount of food during the week with the limited amount of meal swipes and dining dollars included in university meal plans.

<!-- excerpt -->

“I’ve considered doing it myself, too,” freshman Yamini Malli said. “The fact that people are sneaking in just shows that the dining hall plans need to change and that people are hungry and need food to eat. The only way they’re able to do that is if they sneak in.”

The University provides four meal plan options: 12 meals and 15 dining dollars per week, 10 meals and 45 dining dollars per week, 47 meals per week, and 130 dining dollars per week. 

The last two options are hundreds to a thousand dollars more expensive than the first two. In the absence of a middle ground within the pricing, students are left with a difficult choice when they sign up for housing and dining.

“The 12 classic meals, 15 dining dollars and the 10 classic meals, 45 dining dollars plans are the two most popular meal plans among our residents in the undergraduate residence halls,” Director of Housing Information and Marketing Mari Anne Brocker Curry said. “They give the most flexibility between the two types of meal currency.”

But if a student wants to eat three meals a day at the dining halls, starting on Sunday when balances reset, they would run out of swipes by Wednesday.

To avoid spending money on food at restaurants, students have to ration their swipes and dining dollars.

It’s a major source of stress for Malli, who used to eat out at least three times a week. She recently started making spreadsheets outlining when and where she would eat each day.

“I’ve been trying to save money,” Malli said. “So for the past two days, I’ve been eating one meal per day and relying on ramen to save my meal swipes for later.”

In one week, she ate dehydrated noodles 10 times. 

Those that refuse to sacrifice their nutrition to save money have found alternative ways to access the dining halls. Students are often seen holding the side doors open for their friends, reentering the dining area after exiting, or packaging food in tupperware to take back to their room.

This behavior doesn’t go unnoticed by the dining hall staff. But as students themselves, they understand the nuance of the issue.

“My job description is to check people in. It’s not to police people. So honestly, I’m not doing anything more than what I’m getting paid for,” staff member Michael Summerville said. “It’s not that deep to me, either, especially since I know where they’re coming from.” 

University Housing maintains that the meal plans are carefully tailored to meet students’ needs and preferences. Their staff includes two registered dieticians to ensure that the menus are balanced and nutritional.

“We look at a variety of data including but not limited to information on student usage and preference, research on how meal plans contribute to student success, benchmarking with peer institutions, and expenses like food cost, labor and utilities,” Curry said.

She welcomes student feedback as an essential part of the process. If that’s true, there could be some changes in the future.

With this semester’s irregular dining hall hours, temporary closure of the Caffienator and Florida Avenue’s dining hall, and nationwide supply delays, students have become more vocal about their dissatisfaction with university dining.

“I think including an option that’s in the middle–– 21 meals and 15 dining dollars, or even just around that number, like 18 or 16 meals–– would be good,” Malli said.

Until then, the alarm at Ikenberry will continue to ring. And Summerville will continue to not care.

“Nobody’s trying to play a prank when they’re hungry. It’s just about what people need,” he said. “People are gonna get what they need. That’s all there really is to it, to be honest.”
