---
title: "What It Means to Be an 'International' Student: Socialism, Non-Profits and a Suburban Roommate"
date: 2021-11-10
author: Talia Duffy
---

Vaibhav Srikumar wants you to know that he is not a communist.

Throughout his seventeen years, Srikumar has lived in South Africa, India, Dubai, Singapore, and finally, the United States to attend the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

“The thing about me is that I move around a lot,” Srikumar said. “I’m like a nomad… Identity-wise, I’m really confused. There’s no legitimate place I consider home.” 

Living in primarily urban areas, Srikumar was exposed to extreme economic inequality from a very young age. These experiences inspired him to dedicate his life to making a better world for everyone-– a world better than the one he saw outside his window in every country. 

<!-- excerpt -->

He’s a socialist; a self-proclaimed advocate for increased emphasis on welfare within a democratic society. He’s not a communist. And according to Srikumar, that’s a very important distinction to make. 

“They’re not the same,” Srikumar said. “Socialism is when the people, the citizens, own the factors of production. The government is just an administrator of things that the people own, whereas in communism, the government literally owns all of it and distributes it among the society.” 

Dubai most significantly impacted Srikumar’s ideological development, as that’s where he spent the bulk of his adolescent and teenage years. 

He recalls speaking to a bus driver about the necessity of taking on 17 hour workdays, seeing gentrification in his own neighborhood, and walking past work camps just a few blocks away. 

As he began to recognize these issues around him, Srikumar became consumed by the search for further information and solutions. He started to pay closer attention to the news, read books about the economy and politics, and participate in volunteer work.

Srikumar’s brother, Vaanchit, saw this development in real time.

“Early teens, he kinda started really reading the news, talking to people about politics and whatnot,” Vaanchit said. “And I mean, I enjoy talking about that, we talk about that stuff a lot, but to him, it’s almost a passion. A won't-shut-up-about-it passion.”

Srikumar actualized this passion through volunteerism around Dubai. It started simple; in the absence of an effective recycling system, the brothers would collect papers off the streets and take them to the sole recycling center in the city. 

As Srikumar got older, he took the next step up and started to work with nonprofit organizations. In high school, he started his own, which now goes by the name Welfare, Inc. Its initial focus was marine conservation, but soon it extended to combat broader social issues like inequality, hypermasculinity, and irregular social structures.

He still participates in a supervisor role at Welfare, Inc, and aims to have its fundraising campaigns featured by global philanthropic organization Dubai Cares in December.

Despite this involvement, Srikumar has found it difficult to avoid disenchantment with the system. Often, the work becomes tarnished by consumerism.

“The truth about non-profits is that they’re not really non-profit,” Srikumar said. “What essentially happens is that private players give us a lot of money, we introduce a campaign, and we promote a certain company as part of that campaign.

“And though that does help the campaign… it becomes more about improving the image of the private company than about actually combating the problem.” 

Since then, Srikumar has distanced himself slightly from involvement in his organization, hence his loose position as supervisor. He currently focuses on his education here at the University of Illinois, where he majors in economics. 

But coming to school in the United States caused Srikumar to realize that his life experience is very different from those around him.

Not everyone agrees with his views. Not everyone shares his perspective. And one of those people is Srikumar’s roommate, Drew Talkington, who grew up exclusively in a Northwest suburb of Chicago.

The duo’s neighbors can often hear their passionate disagreements echoing down the hallway. They debate politics, the economy, and even general outlooks on life. But instead of creating a division, they see it as an opportunity for growth and learning.

“It’s never hostile. It’s more just curious, and it’s actually very positive. That’s part of the point of college, to get different cultures and ideas flowing together.” Talkington said. “It’s not supposed to be easy.” 

The ability to discuss these issues freely actually means a lot to Srikumar. He often had to dance around red tape, working for his Dubai nonprofit in other countries to avoid oppression and censorship from the monarchy in the United Arab Emirates.

Srikumar knows that some of his views are considered controversial. But he holds on to the opportunity to discuss with his peers, get involved, expand his education, and someday continue what he started as a teenager in Dubai. 

“I lived in a country where people don’t really have a lot of freedom. People don’t really have freedom of speech, freedom of thought,” Srikumar said. “But at the end of it, even in this complicated world, I can still see people living peacefully and people living happily and people living good lives.”
