---
title: Parties and COVID-19 Cases Simultaneously Resurge at UIUC
date: 2021-12-01
author: Talia Duffy
---

A freshman girl followed the sound of thumping bass and muffled singing down a short flight of stairs. With each step, the girl’s shoes stuck to the hardwood floors. Finally, she turned the corner and reached the basement of Sigma Nu’s senior house. 

And that’s when the smell of hundreds of people’s sweat hit her. Christine Bello pulled up her mask.

“I remember at the beginning of the year, I was trying to keep my mask on the entire time,” Bello, a freshman, said. “I still wanted to be part of the scene, but I was so scared out of my mind of getting COVID.”

<!-- excerpt -->

On that warm night in mid-August, Bello saw hundreds of people walking the streets, likely heading towards the next fraternity house. She had no doubt that this year, parties at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign would be in full swing. 

Last year, this was not the case.

When COVID-19 hit the United States, party culture at the University of Illinois faced increased scrutiny and university crackdowns. But since vaccines have become increasingly available and “covid-fatigue” started to become a reality, the scene is changing yet again.

“Everybody just kind of forgot about it,” Bello said. “If I would’ve caught it, I would’ve caught it already because I’m living with so many different people every day.”

A recent survey confirmed that students’ attitudes towards partying have changed significantly since the 2020-2021 school year.

Out of all sophomore, junior, and senior students surveyed, 63% said that they did not feel comfortable partying last year based on the state of COVID-19 on campus. Just 26% said they were comfortable.

Sophomore Adedotun Adelabu, Sigma Chi’s scholarship chairman, recalls that the experience he had as a freshman wasn’t quite what he was expecting from a top 10 party school. 

“It was more secretive,” Adelabu said. “It had to be lower key because if the wrong person heard, your fraternity could be faced with getting removed from the campus. There were less people invited to try to mitigate the risk as much as possible.” 

National fraternity organizations, the government, and the university itself each imposed regulations on campus fraternities, altering their ability to host parties and other social gatherings.

One fraternity was banned for holding a party in the basement of their chapter house. To avoid the same fate, all Sigma Chi events were held at third party locations with smaller invite lists.

As college students became eligible for the vaccine and the summer months brought COVID numbers to a new low, these restrictions waned–– along with students’ wariness towards partying.

When asked about their comfort levels partying this year, the percentages for sophomores and above nearly flipped, with 67% saying they were comfortable and 33% saying they weren’t.

However, COVID-19 statistics released by the university do not reflect this attitude shift. Cases have recently started to climb again.

On November 30th, 2020, the seven-day average positivity rate was 0.54%. Exactly a year later, the seven-day average has hit 1.54%.

Despite the fact that COVID numbers on campus are on the rise, Adelabu believes that students have valid reasons to return to party culture. 

“Since college students weren’t going out as much last year, they kind of got into a rut,” Adelabu said. “At our house, we call it the Vortex, where you’re pretty much just going through the motions, doing the same thing day by day.”

Since last year, Adelabu has noticed the university backing off from its previously restrictive stance on Fraternity activity. 

“Now, with less restrictions and more people being on campus, more people are going out and having opportunities that they didn't have before,” Adelabu said.

Many students opted out of university housing last year, choosing instead to learn online from their homes. For each one of these students, the University was deprived of almost 13 thousand dollars for room and board costs.

Social life on campus is a large attraction for university housing. Some students suspect the University had an ulterior motive when it chose to rely on a vaccine requirement and other regulations, like the Safer Illinois app, instead of prohibiting activities like it did last year. 

“After the first lockdown, people reopened everything to recover economically,” Bello said. “People are being hopeful and they’re trying to recover their businesses. And that’s what this institution basically is. So, in loosening restrictions, they get the revenue for room and board and everything else.”

But whatever the reason, parties are back. And as the undergraduate vaccination rate reaches 95%, there’s no sign they’ll disappear again; 77% of students from all grade levels say they are comfortable with partying this year. 

And they like it better that way.

“It was weird, because last year was still fun,” Adelabu said. “But college now versus college before... it was good that I didn’t have anything to compare it to as a freshman last year, because now, I see the difference.” 
