---
title: There is a "Viral" Disease Spreading in the Music Industry
date: 2022-05-05
author: Talia Duffy
---

In 2007, a man named DeAndre Cortez Way changed the world. He didn’t develop the cure for cancer, or lead a revolution against a despotic government or invent technology to reverse the effects of climate change.

But he did release his debut single, “Crank That (Soulja Boy)”.

It was the first example of a truly viral song, according to Lamont Holden, assistant clinical professor of audio recording technology at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign.

<!-- excerpt -->

“He didn’t have a label,” Holden said. “He had [music production software] FL Studio, he had the internet, in the days where there were no rules, there was no protocol –– it was just do what you can to get as many eyes on whatever you’re doing.”

According to experts on the topic, the idea of “going viral” on social media has changed the music industry, including artists’ methods of music creation and promotion.

A song is considered viral when it gains popularity through social media shares, often through its use in videos by the common content creator. This wasn’t possible before the internet age.

Holden remembers when record companies used to have more control over every step in the process. Searching for artists, producing music, reproducing copies, promoting a brand –– a lot was covered through the vertical integration of conglomerates like Warner Media.

“Now, you could do it from your pocket,” he said. “Anybody now has access to mainstream distribution… because of the internet out, you can generate the type of attention that a record label could generate 20 years ago.”

And when social media sites like Tik Tok and Instagram came into the picture, virality cemented its hold on the music industry. It’s a craze of creation. Holden sees a new path where everyone has the chance to succeed –– and to fail.

On social media, songs can become part of trends, like Tik Tok’s famous “red light challenge.” In this recent trend, users make videos of their silhouette against a red-lit doorway. The videos are users’ own, but the mashup song in the background belongs to Paul Anka and Doja Cat. When users participate in a trend associated with a song, they garner money and popularity for that artist.

However, the length of Tik Tok videos is limited to 60 seconds. People’s attention spans often don’t last as long as that –– for internet content, it’s a little over eight seconds.

As a result, some artists have changed the way they approach songwriting to appeal to social media audiences. This includes Jake Luce, lead singer and guitarist for Kangaroo Court, a local Urbana band.

“You have to just grab them right away,” Luce said. “I think it’s caused me to put a little bit more emphasis onto that pop structure and catchy melodies and things.”

As a music producer and a professor for multiple beatmaking classes at the University, Holden is directly involved in this process. Personally, he keeps his intros to a maximum of 16 bars before dropping the hook, and instructs his students to do the same.

Depending on the beats per minute (BPM), that’s only 12 to 20 seconds before the listener is supposed to be looped in.

Besides the hook, there are other traits that set viral songs apart. Data analysis revealed that the average BPM of viral songs is 122, which is on the high end of average tempo ranges for most genres. In addition, 95% of viral tracks had a “danceability” score of 50 or higher out of 100.

Danceability seems like an abstract concept, but it’s actually a metric calculated using numerical qualities of a song, like beat and rhythm stability. This corresponds with Tik Tok’s ability to propel certain songs to popularity through dance trends.

With so many beats and samples available on the internet, people can produce these songs en masse. However, Holden sees this as a trade off for “authentic artistry.”

“A lot of these people, the music doesn’t sound bad,” he said. “But there’s nothing else with it. There’s no culture, there’s no story. It’s just a bunch of cliches hooked into autotune.”

Artists have started to change their methods of music promotion, too. As with everything on the internet, music streaming services and charts can be broken down to simple programming.

It has become known to artists everywhere as “the algorithm.” Success has become automated –– but that doesn’t mean it can’t be manipulated.

“It depends if the algorithm gives you a kiss on the forehead or not,” said Derek Rios, a hip-hop artist from the midwest more commonly known by his stage name, Rios Mios. He also works as an event curator for other up-and-coming artists. “It’s gotten to the point where me and my artist friends… we have PowerPoints on how to manipulate the algorithm.

“It really is a science.”

According to Rios’s experience, Spotify counts the number of times a newly released song is added to a playlist to decide whether or not it will be added to weekly, personalized “Release Radar” playlists pushed out to users every Friday.

In the first four weeks, if a song gets put on 50 playlists, its chances of appearing on Release Radars increases by 50%.

Artists have worked hard to uncover the ins and outs of the algorithm –– through what Rios calls “Reddit hackers type shit” –– and share it with each other.

For Kangaroo Court, this action is essential. They released their first song in April of this year, so each day becomes a game to reach more audiences. Their manager, Mallory Mahen, spends the majority of her job crafting the band’s social media and manipulating every app’s unique algorithm.

“It’s kind of like working smarter, not harder,” she said. “You can be pushing out all the content you want, but if you don’t understand how that platform actually works and what that platform is built around rewarding, then it’s not going to go viral.”

But the consensus seems to be that clicks, streams and trends aren’t everything. In fact, some are extremely wary of the consequences.

“Going viral, honestly, is dangerous in my eyes, because you can definitely get too big too fast,” Rios said. “You’ll lose that buzz, and someone else will blow up.”

From what he’s witnessed, many artists aren’t ready to keep building on the success they find with their viral song if they don’t have a solid fan base or a professional team behind them.

A song can rise to the top of the charts in what seems like an instant –– but it can drop off just as quickly. The percentage of songs that lasted in the top 100 for longer than 10 weeks dropped from around 87% in 2000 to around 52% in 2013. This indicates that the turnover for popular music has become more rapid since social media took hold.

Additionally, songs are charting for a shorter time. From the early 2000s to the early 2010s, the average number of weeks a song charted in the top 100 dropped from nearly 20 to less than 10 –– a lifespan cut in half.

Holden believes the format of Tik Tok and Instagram –– two of the most popular social media sites for sharing music –– are part of this trend.

“It’s like running people through a bunch of hors d’oeuvres,” Holden said. “It’s not gonna fill you up, the taste and then leave your mouth very quickly… the point is to get you through as many things as possible, not to get you to deep dive and enjoy one thing.”

Clicking a button on a phone is quick engagement, which artists struggle to translate into a long-term fanbase. Rios has seen countless artists flaunt their streams and social media followers, asking him to set up a concert for them. But if they can only muster a crowd of seven or eight, they don’t have a deal.

He said he’d rather give a concert to someone with only 300 Instagram followers that can bring out a crowd of 25. Streams don’t pay the bills; ticket and merchandise sales, which usually require a deeper fanbase, are what’s important to him.

“You gotta have fun to figure out where your value really is, because even if you go viral, it’s not going to make your value go up,” he said.

Mahen and the rest of the Kangaroo court team also aim for balance between a strong social media presence and classic, interpersonal efforts.

At every show, whether it’s at a bigger venue or someone’s backyard, they try to meet and personally connect with as many people in the audience as possible.

“I think that is an aspect that a lot of artists who just try to go viral miss out on. And as long as there’s the live shows and that energy… the numbers don’t really mean anything,” Mahen said. “Any of those numbers is just a stepping stone to make the real live part so much better.”

Now that their song has started picking up steam on Spotify, Kangaroo Court has had to grapple with what that means for their band. They use metrics to check if they’re reaching their target audience, find potential causes of upticks in streams and make sure it’s something they can build off of in the future.

“Not that I would have thought that we didn’t succeed if it didn’t get streams or whatever,” Luce said. “Because I’m still proud of it regardless, but it feels so good to have that external validation.

“We know that we’re building this thing. And this is all that any of us want to do in our lives.”

To build success, artists have always had to play the game. But since the dawn of MySpace, Youtube, Spotify, Tik Tok and countless other manifestations of social media, the rules of the game have changed.

And Soulja Boy told ’em.