---
title: "The Man and the Music: Owning a Record Store in the 21st Century"
date: 2022-03-03
author: Talia Duffy
---

There’s a cardboard cutout of Daft Punk in the corner. A stack of CDs, approximately five feet tall, teeters on a thin wooden stand. Woozy alternative rock emanates from nearby speakers. 

A man wearing a Cheap Trick t-shirt, his voice slightly muffled by the music, explains that the record is by a Champaign local-turned-nationally-successful 90s band called Hum while he searches for his glasses around the speakers.

It’s 2022, and Jeff Brandt still stands behind the counter of a record store.

<!-- excerpt -->

For nearly three decades, Brandt has worked in what most considered a dying industry. But since opening Exile on Main Street in downtown Champaign, Brandt has proved one thing: he didn’t just jump on the bandwagon.

“I really like Champaign, I grew up here.” Brandt said. “It’s a point of pride to have a record store here.”

At the industry’s peak in the 1990s, Brandt recalls there being 11 to 12 record stores in the area. One by one, almost all of them disappeared.

“Unless you were here during that time, it's impossible to imagine there would be that many, let alone five of them within several blocks of each other,” Brandt said. “And some of them were open for decades. It's crazy.”

Brandt was here, and he remembers it well. In high school, he was already connected to music, frequenting the local record stores and getting to know their owners. After spending so much time there, he was offered a job at Periscope Records–– now closed, but Brandt’s favorite.

As one of the few high schoolers ever hired by Periscope, his peers were jealous. Being a retail employee gave him closer connections to the music industry, allowing him to receive advance copies of CDs from up-and-coming artists.

“Hearing Weezer's first album–– like, nobody knew. Nobody knew who Weezer was, and I got this–– we got the promo and I was like, ‘I have to take this to my friends,’” Brandt said. “And then weeks later, The Sweater Song was all over MTV.”

Brandt left Champaign to pursue a journalism degree at the University of Kentucky before dropping out and returning to the record business. In 2004 he opened Exile on Main Street, deriving its name from the 1972 Rolling Stones album and the street of its original location. 

According to its website, Exile has been voted “Best Record Store” in Champaign-Urbana consistently since its opening. In 2014, Brandt relocated to the larger, repurposed old train station, sharing the space with clothing retailer Dandelion Vintage. As the years went by, other record stores closed their doors, but Exile pressed on. 

Now, it’s one of the last of its kind in Champaign-Urbana. 

“The idea of keeping a small business open had kind of fallen out of a lot of people's minds,” Brandt said, “So I mean… if you don't support places like this, then we're not gonna be able to stay open.”

Brandt emphasizes that it hasn’t been easy for him, either. He’s thought about closing Exile “probably every year” since it opened, facing mounting bills and increasing pressure to find ways to survive during the reign of digital music.

And in March 2020, everything grew exponentially worse; without the support of his friends and customers, he says he might have finally given up.

“I was ready to close this door,” Brandt said. “I was like, ‘f— it all.’ You know, worldwide pandemic, that seems like a good reason to go out of business at 15 years, that's perfect.

“But I don't know what else I do. So I kind of have to keep it open”

He says he is glad that he kept Exile open, even after months of closures from the COVID-19 pandemic. 

The recent resurgence in vinyl sales, especially within the youth population, has helped keep record stores like Exile in business. In 2020, vinyl sales surpassed CD sales for the first time since the 1980s.

Brandt was able to bring Exile back to its roots thanks to this shift in the market. For a while, he had to add DVDs and video games to the inventory in an attempt to boost sales, but now he sells almost exclusively records and CDs again.

“It just makes me feel lucky,” Brandt said. “But it's been nice to see the record store not die completely, because it's kind of different than anywhere else.”

University of Illinois freshman Alex Yasumoto is part of the new vinyl market; he started collecting just a few years ago. He saw a turntable at his friend’s house, and that’s all it took.

“I was like, ‘Okay, well, that just looks sick as f—, I gotta get one,’” Yasumoto said. “And so I got the record player from Amazon.”

Yasumoto bought his first record–– “The College Dropout” by Kanye West–– not long after that. He still remembers his shock at hearing the album for the first time on the record player setup, complete with bluetooth speakers. 

For young people like Yasumoto, listening to vinyl has become more of an experience than their primary method of listening to music. He admits that he uses his equipment infrequently at best.

“It’s kind of like toast, where it's a thing you remember once every, like, two years,” Yasumoto said. “I remember [my record player] once every month… but for those times where I have it, I’m like, “Oh, wow, this is really good.

“So it's just all day, I just cycle through them, bang, bang, bang. For those moments, it is worth it.”

The problem? Just because vinyl sales have increased doesn’t mean those sales were made at independent record stores. 

Yasumoto has purchased the majority of his records from online mega-retailers like Amazon, and he’s not the only one. In 2014, Amazon was the leading vinyl seller in 2014, owning 12.4% of the market. The remaining top 5 spots are held by other chains and corporations like Urban Outfitters.

So while Yasumoto is aware of Exile on Main Street’s existence, only a mile from his residence at Scott Hall, he’s never been there. 

“It’s just not part of my interest right now,” Yasumoto said. “For me, the cheap excuse is that buying records is too expensive. I’d rather just buy a cheap one from Amazon.” 

Amazon’s expansive inventory and rapid shipping makes them Exile’s top competitor, but Brandt doesn’t see this competition as fatal.

“People do put too much money in the wrong places thanks to mostly price comparison, and convenience (or being lazy),” Brandt said. “Stores can survive despite that.”

He holds that the community aspect of local record stores will prevent them from fully succumbing to online retailers. He compares his job to bartending, reminiscing on times customers have told him “more than you want to know” about their lives. 

“You'd be shocked, like some of the stuff people come in, I’m like, ‘I didn’t really need to know that. Guess we’re friends, thanks for the info,’” Brandt said. “But I mean… that's part of the fun.” 

Over time, he’s been able to develop a closer relationship with many of his customers. When Exile’s front door swings open, ringing a bell to signal the entrance of another customer, Brandt often greets them by name.

To him, Exile is both a vinyl retailer and a hangout spot, and that dual experience is irreplaceable on the internet.

“People who like shopping in record stores will find us, if that's their thing,” Brandt said. “I guess it boils down to if people like the vibe of shopping in actual record stores, and walking away with things you were looking for, or things you didn't know you wanted before you came in.” 

Even though the majority of Brandt’s customers aren’t students–– most are vinyl fanatics from the greater community–– he recognizes the impact of being in a college town. He’s pleasantly surprised at the role youth vinyl culture has played in sustaining his business.

“It's cool because you know, I'd see kids coming into record stores now, or even [people] a little bit younger than me that didn't necessarily grow up going to them, that do appreciate what a record store is.” Brandt said.

But for a man with so much love and so much history in the industry, Brandt is getting frustrated. He believes that if large music corporations don’t make some changes, the vinyl industry will kill itself before it has the chance to live again.

The major labels–– Columbia, Warner Brothers, Universal–– liquidized their record pressing plants when vinyl sales started to tank.

Now, the few remaining pressing plants are struggling to keep up with high demand. Music from smaller artists takes months to get a vinyl release, and wait times are only growing longer.

“If I could do anything, I would tax the f—ing major labels and be like, ‘build your own pressing plants,’” Brandt said. “Like, you don't need to print 40,000 copies of these Billy Joel records that usually we have used.” 

In an effort to promote smaller, independent record stores worldwide, a group of store owners created an organization called Record Store Day in 2007. Each year, Record Store Day issues limited edition, collectible vinyl to be sold at participating stores on a designated “record store day,” usually the third Saturday of April.

This year, Record Store Day will issue 411 special releases, the largest collection since the program’s first celebration in 2008. This might seem like a sign of a flourishing program, but according to Brandt, not all store owners see it that way. 

Shuffled within bins of used and new records at Exile on Main Street are Record Store Day releases from years past–– never sold. 

“It's supporting an idea that's increasingly against the idea of Record [Store Day],” Brandt said. “It’s just, I don't want to s— all over it over too much, because it's a really good thing. But it's just–– it's hard to meet people's expectations. And it's such a huge financial risk for the record stores if they go all-in on it, because you can't return anything.”

To him, the large amount of releases this year is a sign that Record Store Day is becoming just another huge company that’s in over their heads; an organization that was created to fix a problem but then became a part of it.

“Each year there's an increase of people saying ‘screw this,’ or, ‘this is bad for me,’” Brandt said.

Yasumoto is similarly concerned about the future of independent record stores. He sees shopping local as a trend with an expiration date as bigger corporations start to reinsert themselves into the industry. 

“You have to adapt to the current market, and who you're marketing for.” Yasumoto said. “You're not marketing for old people anymore. I guess you're still marketing for the group that really appreciates the local record stores, but you also have to appeal to the common consumer.”

But even if store owners make those changes, Yasumoto doesn’t think businesses like Exile can survive.

“I can't visualize an even possible way of them doing it,” Yasumoto said. “I don't think it's realistic. That’s just the sad part. That's the cynical part of it.”

This general cynicism about the record industry’s future is no secret to Brandt, but he says he’s unphased. Marketing methods like social media outreach aren’t his priority; he runs Exile on Main Street the way he wants to, and has faith that it’s enough to keep him open.

“Young folks are essential for sure, but I don't assume they are all going to be interested in my shop, and that's fine,” Brandt said. “You either get it, and like it, and want to support it, or don't.”

Despite all of Brandt’s grievances about the 21st century record industry, music is his life’s work. There have been many close calls at Exile on Main Street, but he just can’t tear himself away.

The Hum record skips a bit. No one in the store notices but Brandt. He looks over at it, finally having found his glasses.

“This 380 dollar record is skipping,” says the man who owns one of the last record stores in Champaign-Urbana. “I need to clean it.”
